# spotify

An old adage says that “music is the language of the soul”. To the millennial and avid music listener alike, this can be very subjective amongst friends and relatives. In social settings where music can be played, the song selection can be crucial due to the power of music itself: music can change the mood and affect the way others may interact and function in any given setting. You listen to Celine Dion’s “My Heart Will Go On” when you are sad, and Michael Jackson’s “Thriller” during Halloween parties. No matter what the scene, music will always set the mood. So when it comes to social settings amongst friends and relatives, there is usually a high amount of pressure and power to whoever is controlling the tunes of the night. Therefore, our team concludes that the future of music selection should be collaborative. Whether you are picking the best Prince song for a party or making an entire Rascal Flatts playlist for a road trip, we want to make an unprecedented collaborative song selection experience unlike any other. In the past, collaborative playlists have been completely inefficient. Today, many people are using a single phone or laptop to control the music at a party. This leads to people having to locate the person and the device that is playing music and requesting a song manually through them. We have found a better way to not only surpass this inconvenience, but also to create a music playlist everyone is happy with. 

With an estimated 30 million users, Spotify has changed the way we listen to music and therefore is the platform in which we will test and create our application. Using the Spotify SDKs for iOS and Android, we will develop native apps for both platforms in which people can join a room that the host (who has Spotify Premium) has created, and add songs from their own mobile devices. Not only will the user be able to add their own songs, but all users will also be able to vote on songs in the playlist to move them up or down in the song queue making it a more democratic system. The party also won’t have to worry about a song no one wants to hear - enough down votes and the song will get removed from the queue! Afraid the song you really like won’t get enough upvotes to be played since no one has heard of it? No worries! We plan on allowing each person to add one song to a separate queue, called “The 1” queue. The app will alternate playing songs from the Popular Queue and “The 1” Queue. After doing some research, we found that apps very similar to this have been done before. However, we believe we are the first to do it cross platform. The way we let guests add one of their favorite songs to “The 1” queue is also unique. 

After much research, our team identified that there are no impactful collaborative approaches to music selection that is reaching large audiences. However, there are a few apps out there trying to accomplish the same thing. One of the apps that is similar to our idea is Jukestar. In Jukestar, members join a private room (just as we plan to implement) and can add songs to a queue, voting on them to reorder the queue. However, only the host has the power to play whatever song he/she wants and there is no “The 1” Queue for those songs that a single guest absolutely wants to be played. To make matters worse, Jukestar’s user interface is not notably clean or interesting to the eye.  More information on Jukestar can be found at https://jukestar.mobi. The other apps we explored also did not have the popularity we hoped for or expected, and explains why the collaborative listening experience has not evolved over time. Other apps we found to be similar were Festify (https://festify.rocks/), Populrr ( https://populrr.com/), and OutLoud (https://outloud.dj/). We think that our application has the potential to benefit many people and make a big impact in social settings like parties and maybe even businesses. Mizzou has endless opportunities for us to reach a large audience and that’s who we intend to target first once completing the app.
